The Cookie Caper

	?Run!? I yelled to my brother as we leaped from behind my grandfather?s chair and shot out the back door to hide behind the shed. Some spies we were. We didn?t even make it past Nana and Paps snoring the afternoon away in their recliners. I felt the swat of my grandfather?s newspaper on my leg as we made our escape and heard him chuckle as the back door slammed. 
	?You always get us caught,? said my brother as we made a new plan to sneak into the house. ?Me?? I asked. ?If you hadn?t bumped your head on the table or tripped over the lamp cord, we might have made it.?  ?Hmph,? he said. ?Anyway, now they?ve figured it out, and Nana will be getting up soon to make dinner, so we?ve got to act fast.? 
	We hatched a new plan. Our mission centered around a plate of chocolate chip cookies cooling on the small table against the wall in the kitchen. There were only two ways in and out of the kitchen, and one of those was locked. On hands and knees we crawled between the hedge and the house toward the back door.  I could smell crushed leaves and could feel small sticks biting into my palms. I could hear my brother behind me slapping the buzz of mosquitoes away from his ears. Finally, I could see the screen door with its wrought-iron dolphin motif.
	My brother caught up as I grasped the bottom of the dolphin?s tail and pulled it toward me. The door caught for a moment but then swung freely outward with only a sigh. ?Whew,? I whispered. ?He must have oiled it recently.? My brother held the bottom corner of the door as I crawled onto the crushed brown carpet directly behind the recliners. I could hear the whistle-snore of my grandfather and the soft breathy snort of my grandmother. My brother wriggled through the screen door and held it as it closed quietly behind him. I winked at him and snaked behind the chairs toward the shiny linoleum floor of the kitchen. Even from my low vantage point, I could see the edge of the white plate on the oak table. 
	We belly-crawled across the linoleum toward the table. Once there, we rested on the floor with our backs against the wall near the table. We could still hear the snores of Nana and Paps. I couldn?t risk standing up, so I reached above my head to grab a cookie from the plate. I couldn?t see the cookies from my vantage point, but I knew they were there. I reached into the middle of the plate, but the only thing I felt was a folded piece of paper. ?What is that?? I thought. I grabbed the paper and showed it to my brother; then I quietly unfolded it and saw the words ?Gotcha! It is almost dinner time!? From the den, I could hear Nana and Paps howling with laughter. My brother just rolled his eyes, and I started to laugh. 
1. Why did the children only have one way into the kitchen?
A. The grandparents blocked the second entrance. 
B. There was only one door to the kitchen.
C. One door to the kitchen was locked. 
D. There was no way into the kitchen.
	  0%								           100%
  Confident							     Confident


2. In this passage, the word hedge means what?
A. Environment.
B. Bushes.
C. Avoid.
D. Fence.

	  0%								           100%
  Confident							     Confident

3. What is the main idea of the passage?
A. The children are trying to sneak by their grandparents to get to some cookies.
B. The children are spying on their grandparents as they sleep.
C. The children are trying to trick their grandparents into giving them cookies.
   D.   The children are trying to get into the kitchen to make cookies for their grandparents. 
	  0%								         100%
  Confident							     Confident

4. Why weren?t the children able to get the cookies from the kitchen?
A. They decided to play spy instead of trying to get the cookies. 
B. They were never able to sneak past their grandparents without getting caught.
C. The grandparents ate all the cookies before they fell asleep.
D. The grandparents figured out what they were doing and moved the cookies.
	  0%								         100%
  Confident							     Confident
      5.  How do you know the grandparents are not mad at the children?
A. They laugh and play a trick on the children.
B. They give the children the cookies anyway.
C. They decide to play with the children in the kitchen.
D. The grandparents decide to take the children out to dinner.

	  0%								         100%
  Confident							     Confident

On a scale between 1 and 10 with 1 being low and 10 being how well did you like this passage?
Didn?t Like It At All
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10I Really Liked It
Predicting: Write a paragraph and tell what you think happens next in the story. Do the children ever get the cookies?



3rd(22)


