We have a sizable footprint in place to win new business (marketing, strategic marketing, learning technology representatives, regional managers, digital learning consultants, etc…).  First and foremost, I believe that the role of the DoDC is to make sure that we keep the business that we have – to stem any potential for customer attrition.

The DoDC has often been a customer of our organization long before becoming an employee. We know much about the world that our instructor-adoptors live in. We are the advocates for these instructors to make sure that they have the best possible experience with our digital products. We ensure that the technology serves them well and causes them no embarrassment with their students.

We are also advocates for the students who use our digital products. It is up to us to remind our product teams that content errors can have real consequences – a C- becomes a D, a marginal student falls into academic probation or loses access to financial aid. Not because of their mistakes but because of our failure to deliver products that reliably avoid false-negatives in grading. And, we remain cognizant that false-positives put the instructor in a position of warranting mastery in situations where more effort or comprehension is necessary by the student.

Our first mantra, must be: ‘do no harm’. Errors can live in print products for years and never be discovered by our customers. And yet, when put into digital form, for reasons unknown to me, those errors quickly become visible. We sometimes can do harm with our digital products. We, as DoDC’s also recognize that our product teams, in their effort to push the limits of technology, may exceed those limits. It’s up to us to recommend pulling back a bit. Better to identify skeletons and limitations internally before our customers are impacted.

In addition to our fully understanding the pedagogy of our respective disciplines, the DoDC must be well versed in the authoring technologies used to create the digital content used in these disciplines. We lead my mastering the technologies of EZT, Compose, Annotate, SmartBuilder, Habitat and Bento. We are comfortable with the digital lingua-franca of HTML, CSS and basic scripting languages. And we take the initiative to train others on our product teams in the use of these authoring tools. We transmit our comfort with these tools to product developers and, as the teachers we once were, have the patience to help product team members also become completely comfortable in using these tools. But we don’t compromise. Everyone has the potential to learn and a bit of technological comprehension is essential.

We let the managing directors (publishers) to whom we report  know that we ‘have their back’. If there are potential problems in products being developed or tools and technologies that are not ready for ‘prime time’, we say so. We are willing to take the position that the glass is half empty in an organization that is oriented to glass being half-full, one of optimism and sunshine.  

Finally, when a LTR is in deep trouble with a customer, we are willing to step in, get on the phone, visit a campus and have an honest conversation with our former colleagues. If we have screwed up, we say so and follow up with the knowledge and experience to communicate how we plan to fix the problem.
