

Price Elasticity of Demand
The law of demand tells us that, other things equal, consumers will buy more of a product when its price declines and less when its price increases. But how much more or less will they buy? The amount varies from product to product and over different price ranges for the same product.
It also may vary over time. And such variations matter. For example, a firm contemplating a price hike will want to know how consumers will respond. If they remain highly loyal and continue to buy, the firm?s revenue will rise. But if consumers defect en masse to other sellers or other products, the firm?s revenue will tumble.
The responsiveness (or sensitivity) of consumers to a price change is measured by a product?s price elasticity of demand. For some products?for example, restaurant meals?consumers are highly responsive to price changes. Modest price changes cause very large changes in the quantity purchased. Economists say that the demand for such products is relatively elastic or simply elastic.
For other products?for example, toothpaste? consumers pay much less attention to price changes. Substantial price changes cause only small changes in the amount purchased. The demand for such products is relatively inelastic or simply inelastic.
The Price-Elasticity Coefficient and Formula
Economists measure the degree to which demand is price elastic or inelastic with the coefficient Ed, defined as the percentage changes in the equation are calculated by dividing the change in quantity demanded by the original quantity demanded and by dividing the change in price by the original price. So we can restat\e the formula as
Elasticity
Using Averages Unfortunately, an annoying problem arises in computing the price-elasticity coefficient. A price change from, say, $4 to $5 along a demand curve is a 25 percent (= $1/$4) change from $5 to $4 along the same curve is a 20 percent (= $1/$5) decrease. Which percentage change in price should we use in the denominator to compute the price-elasticity coefficient? And when quantity changes, for example, from 10 to 20, it is a 100 percent (=10/10) increase. But when quantity falls from 20 to 10 along the identical demand curve, it is a 50 percent (=10/20) decrease. Should we use 100 percent or 50 percent in the numerator of the elasticity formula? Elasticity should be the same whether price rises or falls!
The simplest solution to the problem is to use the midpoint formula for calculating elasticity. This formula simply averages the two prices and the two quantities as the reference points for computing the percentages. That is,
Ed = change in quantity sum of quantities/2 / change in price sum of prices/2 
For the same $52$4 price range, the price reference is $4.50 [= ($5 - $4)/2], and for the same 10?20 quantity range, the quantity reference is 15 units [= (10 - 20)/2]. The percentage change in price is now $1/$4.50, or about 22 percent, and the percentage change in quantity is 10 15, or about 67 percent. So Ed is about 3. This solution eliminates the ?up versus down? problem. All the price-elasticity coefficients that follow are calculated using this midpoint formula.
Using Percentages Why use percentages rather than absolute amounts in measuring consumer responsiveness? There are two reasons. First, if we use absolute changes, the choice of units will arbitrarily affect our impression of buyer responsiveness.
To illustrate: If the price of a bag of popcorn at the local softball game is reduced from $3 to $2 and consumers increase their purchases from 60 to 100 bags, it will seem that consumers are quite sensitive to price changes and therefore that demand is elastic. After all, a price change of 1 unit has caused a change in the amount demanded of 40 units. But by changing the monetary unit from dollars to pennies (why not?), we find that a price change of 100 units (pennies) causes a quantity change of 40 units. This may falsely lead us to believe that demand is inelastic. We avoid this problem by using percentage changes. This particular price decline is the same whether we measure it in dollars or pennies.
Second, by using percentages, we can correctly compare consumer responsiveness to changes in the prices of different products. It makes little sense to compare the effects on quantity demanded of (1) a $1 increase in the price of a $10,000 used car with (2) a $1 increase in the price of a $1 soft drink. Here the price of the used car has increased by .01 percent while the price of the soft drink is up by 100 percent. We can more sensibly compare the consumer responsiveness to price increases by using some common percentage increase in price for both.
Elimination of Minus Sign We know from the downsloping demand curve that price and quantity demanded are inversely related. Thus, the price-elasticity coefficient of demand Ed will always be a negative number. As an example, if price declines, then quantity demanded will increase. This means that the numerator in our formula will be positive and the denominator negative, yielding a negative Ed. For an increase in price, the numerator will be negative but the denominator positive, again yielding a negative Ed.
Economists usually ignore the minus sign and simply present the absolute value of the elasticity coefficient to avoid an ambiguity that might otherwise arise. It can be confusing to say that an E of 24 is greater than one of 22. This possible confusion is avoided when we say an Ed of 4 reveals greater elasticity than one of 2. So, in what follows, we ignore the minus sign in the coefficient of price elasticity of demand and show only the absolute value. Incidentally, the ambiguity does not arise with supply because price and quantity supplied are positively related. All elasticity of supply coefficients therefore are positive numbers.
Interpretations of Ed
We can interpret the coefficient of price elasticity of demand as follows.

Elastic Demand Demand is elastic if a specific percentage change in price results in a larger percentage change in quantity demanded. In such cases, Ed will be greater than 1. Example: Suppose that a 2 percent decline in the price of cut flowers results in a 4 percent increase in quantity demanded. Then demand for cut flowers is elastic and Ed = 0.04/0.02 = 2
Inelastic Demand If a specific percentage change in price produces a smaller percentage change in quantity demanded, demand is inelasticsuch cases, Ed will be less than 1. Example: Suppose that a 2 percent decline in the price of coffee leads to only a 1 percent increase in quantity demanded. Then demand is inelastic and Ed = 0.01/0.02= 0.5
Unit Elasticity The case separating elastic and inelastic demands occurs where a percentage change in price and the resulting percentage change in quantity demanded are the same. Example: Suppose that a 2 percent drop in the price of chocolate causes a 2 percent increase in quantity demanded. This special case is termed unit elasticity because Ed is exactly 1, or unity. In this example,...
Extreme Cases When we say demand is ?inelastic,? we do not mean that consumers are completely unresponsive to a price change. In that extreme situation, where a price change results in no change whatsoever in the quantity demanded, economists say that demand is perfectly inelastic. The price-elasticity coefficient is zero because there is no response to a change in price. Approximate examples include an acute diabetic?s demand for insulin or an addict?s demand for heroin. A line parallel to the vertical axis, such as D1 in Figure 4.1a, shows perfectly inelastic demand graphically.
Conversely, when we say demand is ?elastic,? we do not mean that consumers are completely responsive to a price change. In that extreme situation, where a small price reduction causes buyers to increase their purchases from zero to all they can obtain, the elasticity coefficient is infinite (= inf) and economists say demand is perfectly elastic. A line parallel to the horizontal axis, such as D2 in Figure 4.1b, shows perfectly elastic demand. You will see in Chapter 8 that such a demand applies to a firm?say, a mining firm?that is selling its output in a purely competitive market.
The Total-Revenue Test
The importance of elasticity for firms relates to the effect of price changes on total revenue and thus on profits (= total revenue minus total costs).
Total revenue (TR) is the total amount the seller receives from the sale of a product in a particular time period; it is calculated by multiplying the product price (P) by the quantity sold (Q). In equation form: TR = P x Q Graphically, total revenue is represented by the P x Q rectangle lying below a point on a demand curve. At point a in Figure 4.2a, for example, price is $2 and quantity demanded is 10 units. So total revenue is $20 (= $2 x 10), shown by the rectangle composed of the yellow and green areas under the demand curve. We know from basic geometry that the area of a rectangle is found by multiplying one side by the other. Here, one side is ?price? ($2) and the other is ?quantity demanded? (10 units).
Total revenue and the price elasticity of demand are related. In fact, the easiest way to infer whether demand is elastic or inelastic is to employ the total-revenue test. Here is the test: Note what happens to total revenue when price changes. If total revenue changes in the opposite direction from price, demand is elastic. If total revenue changes in the same direction as price, demand is inelastic. If total revenue does not change when price changes, demand is unit-elastic.
Elastic demand
Elastic Demand If demand is elastic, a decrease in price will increase total revenue. Even though a lesser price is received per unit, enough additional units are sold to more than make up for the lower price. For an example, look at demand curve D1 in Figure 4.2a. We have already established that at point a, total revenue is $20 (= $2 x 10), shown as the yellow plus green area. If the price declines from $2 to $1 (point b), the quantity demanded becomes 40 units and total revenue is $40 (= $1 x 40). As a result of the price decline, total revenue has increased from $20 to $40. Total revenue has increased in this case because the $1 decline in price applies to 10 units, with a consequent revenue loss of $10 (the yellow area). But 30 more units are sold at $1 each, resulting in a revenue gain of $30 (the blue area). Visually, the gain of the blue area clearly exceeds the loss of the yellow area. As indicated, the overall result is a net increase in total revenue of $20 (= $30 x $10).
The analysis is reversible: If demand is elastic, a price increase will reduce total revenue. The revenue gained on the higher-priced units will be more than offset by the revenue lost from the lower quantity sold. Bottom line: Other things equal, when price and total revenue move in opposite directions, demand is elastic. Ed is greater than 1, meaning the percentage change in quantity demanded is greater than the percentage change in price. 

Inelastic Demand
Inelastic Demand If demand is inelastic, a price decrease will reduce total revenue. The increase in sales will not fully offset the decline in revenue per unit, and total revenue will decline. To see this, look at demand curve D2 in Figure 4.2b. At point c on the curve, price is $4 and quantity demanded is 10. Thus total revenue is $40, shown by the combined yellow and green rectangle. If the price drops to $1 (point d), total revenue declines to $20, which obviously is less than $40. Total revenue has declined because the loss of revenue (the yellow area) from the lower unit price is larger than the gain in revenue (the blue area) from the accompanying increase in sales. Price has fallen, and total revenue has also declined.
Our analysis is again reversible: If demand is inelastic, a price increase will increase total revenue. So, other things equal, when price and total revenue move in the same direction, demand is inelastic. Ed is less than 1, meaning the percentage change in quantity demanded is less than the percentage change in price. 
Unit Elasticity
Unit Elasticity In the special case of unit elasticity, an increase or a decrease in price leaves total revenue unchanged. The loss in revenue from a lower unit price is exactly offset by the gain in revenue from the accompanying increase in sales. Conversely, the gain in revenue from a higher unit price is exactly offset by the revenue loss associated with the accompanying decline in the amount demanded.
In Figure 4.2c (demand curve D3) we find that at the price of $3, 10 units will be sold, yielding total revenue of $30. At the lower $1 price, a total of 30 units will be sold, again resulting in $30 of total revenue. The $2 price reduction causes the loss of revenue shown by the yellow area, but this is exactly offset by the revenue gain shown by the blue area. Total revenue does not change. In fact, that would be true for all price changes along this particular curve.
Total revenue remains constant, demand is unit-elastic (or unitary). Ed is 1, meaning the percentage change in quantity equals the percentage change in price.
Price Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve
Table 4.1 and Figure 4.3 demonstrate that elasticity typically varies over different price ranges of the same demand schedule or curve. Plotting the hypothetical data for movie tickets shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 4.1 yields demand curve D in Figure 4.3. Observe that the demand curve is linear. But we see from column 3 of the table that the price elasticity coefficient for this demand curve declines as we move from higher to lower prices. For all downsloping straight-line and most other demand curves, demand is more price-elastic toward the upper left (here, the $5?$8 price range of D) than toward the lower right (here, the $4?$1 price range of D).
This is the consequence of the arithmetic properties of the elasticity measure. Specifically, in the upper-left segment of the demand curve, the percentage change in quantity is large because the original reference quantity is small. Similarly, the percentage change in price is small in that segment because the original reference price is large. The relatively large percentage change in quantity divided by the relatively small change in price yields a large Ed ?an elastic demand.
The reverse holds true for the lower-right segment of the demand curve. Here the percentage change in quantity is small because the original reference quantity is large; similarly, the percentage change in price is large because the original reference price is small. The relatively small percentage change in quantity divided by the relatively large percentage change in price results in a small Ed ?an inelastic demand.
The demand curve in Figure 4.3a also illustrates that the slope of a demand curve?its flatness or steepness?is not a sound basis for judging elasticity. The catch is that the slope of the curve is computed from absolute changes in price and quantity, while elasticity involves relative or percentage changes in price and quantity. The demand curve in Figure 4.3a is linear, which by definition means that the slope is constant throughout. But we have demonstrated that such a curve is elastic in its high-price ($8?$5) range and inelastic in its low-price ($4?$1) range.
Price Elasticity and Total Revenue
In Figure 4.3b we plot the total revenue per week to the theater owner that corresponds to each price-quantity combination indicated along demand curve D in Figure 4.3a. The price?quantity-demanded combination represented by point a on the demand curve yields total revenue of $8000 (= $ x 1000 tickets). In Figure 4.3b, we plot this $8000 amount vertically at 1 unit (1000 tickets) demanded. Similarly, the price?quantity-demanded combination represented by point b in the upper panel yields total revenue of $14,000 (= $7 x 2000 tickets). This amount is graphed vertically at 2 units (2000 tickets) demanded in the lower panel. The ultimate result of such graphing is totalrevenue curve TR, which first slopes upward, then reaches a maximum, and finally turns downward.
Comparison of curves D and TR sharply focuses the relationship between elasticity and total revenue. Lowering the ticket price in the elastic range of demand?for example, from $8 to $5?increases total revenue. Conversely, increasing the ticket price in that range reduces total revenue. In both cases, price and total revenue change in opposite directions, confirming that demand is elastic.
The $5?$4 price range of demand curve D reflects unit elasticity. When price either decreases from $5 to $4 or increases from $4 to $5, total revenue remains $20,000. In both cases, price has changed and total revenue has remained constant, confirming that demand is unit-elastic when we consider these particular price changes.
In the inelastic range of demand curve D, lowering the price?for example, from $4 to $1?decreases total revenue, as shown in Figure 4.3b. Raising the price boosts total revenue. In both cases, price and total revenue move in the same direction, confirming that demand is inelastic. 
Table 4.2 summarizes the characteristics of price elasticity of demand. You should review it carefully.
Price Elasticity of Supply
Price elasticity also applies to supply. If the quantity supplied by producers is relatively responsive to price changes, supply is elastic. If it is relatively insensitive to price changes, supply is inelastic.
We measure the degree of price elasticity or inelasticity of supply with the coefficient Es, defined almost like Ed except that we substitute ?percentage change in quantity supplied? for ?percentage change in quantity demanded?:
Es = percentage change in quantity supplied of product X percentage change in price of product X
For reasons explained earlier, the averages, or midpoints, of the before and after quantities supplied and the before and after prices are used as reference points for the percentage changes. Suppose an increase in the price of a good from $4 to $6 increases the quantity supplied from 10 units to 14 units. The percentage change in price would be 25 , or 40 percent, and the percentage change in quantity would be 4 12, or 33 percent.
In this case, supply is inelastic because the price-elasticity coefficient is less than 1. If Es is greater than 1, supply is elastic. If it is equal to 1, supply is unit-elastic. Also, Es is never negative, since price and quantity supplied are directly related. Thus, there are no minus signs to drop, as was necessary with elasticity of demand.
The degree of price elasticity of supply depends on how easily?and therefore quickly?producers can shift resources between alternative uses. The easier and more rapidly producers can shift resources between alternative uses, the greater the price elasticity of supply. Take the case of Christmas trees. A firm?s response to, say, an increase in the price of trees depends on its ability to shift resources from the production of other products (whose prices we assume remain constant) to the production of trees. And shifting resource takes time: The longer the time, the greater the ?shiftability.? So we can expect a greater response, and therefore greater elasticity of supply, the longer a firm has to adjust to a price change.
In analyzing the impact of time on elasticity, economists distinguish among the immediate market period, the short run, and the long run.
Price Elasticity of Supply:The Short Run
The short run in microeconomics is a period of time too short to change plant capacity but long enough to use the fixed-sized plant more or less intensively. In the short run, our farmer?s plant (land and farm machinery) is fixed. But he does have time in the short run to cultivate tomatoes more intensively by applying more labor and more fertilizer and pesticides to the crop. The result is a somewhat greater output in response to a presumed increase in demand; this greater output is reflected in a more elastic supply of tomatoes, as shown by Ss in Figure 4.4b. Note now that the increase in demand from D1 to D2 is met by an increase in quantity (from Q0 to Qs), so there is a smaller price adjustment (from P0 to Ps) than would be the case in the market period. The equilibrium price is therefore lower in the short run than in the market period.
Price Elasticity of Supply: The Long Run
The long run in microeconomics is a time period long enough for firms to adjust their plant sizes and for new firms to enter (or existing firms to leave) the industry. In the ?tomato industry,? for example, our farmer has time to acquire additional land and buy more machinery and equipment. Furthermore, other farmers may, over time, be attracted to tomato farming by the increased demand and higher price. Such adjustments create a larger supply response, as represented by the more elastic supply curve SL in Figure 4.4c. The outcome is a smaller price rise (P0 to P1) and a larger output increase (Q0 to Q1) in response to the increase in demand from D1 to D2.
There is no total-revenue test for elasticity of supply. Supply shows a positive or direct relationship between price and amount supplied; the supply curve is upsloping. Regardless of the degree of elasticity or inelasticity, price and total revenue always move together.
Cross Elasticity and Income Elasticity of Demand
Price elasticities measure the responsiveness of the quantity of a product demanded or supplied when its price changes. The consumption of a good also is affected by a change in the price of a related product or by a change in income.
Cross Elasticity of Demand
The cross elasticity of demand measures how sensitive consumer purchases of one product (say, X) are to a change in the price of some other product (say, Y). We calculate the coefficient of cross elasticity of demand Exy just as we do the coefficient of simple price elasticity, except that we relate the percentage change in the consumption of X to the percentage change in the price of Y:
Exy = percentage change in quantity demanded of product X percentage change in price of product Y
This cross-elasticity (or cross-price-elasticity) concept allows us to quantify and more fully understand substitute and complementary goods, introduced in Chapter 3. Unlike price elasticity, we allow the coefficient of cross elasticity of demand to be either positive or negative.
Substitute Goods If cross elasticity of demand is positive, meaning that sales of X move in the same direction as a change in the price of Y, then X and Y are substitute goods. An example is Evian water (X) and Dasani water (Y). An increase in the price of Evian causes consumers to buy more Dasani, resulting in a positive cross elasticity. The larger the positive crosselasticity coefficient, the greater is the substitutability between the two products.
Complementary Goods When cross elasticity is negative, we know that X and Y ?go together?; an increase in the price of one decreases the demand for the other. So the two are complementary goods. For example, a decrease in the price of digital cameras will increase the number of memory sticks purchased. The larger the negative cross-elasticity coefficient, the greater between the two goods.
Independent Goods A zero or near-zero cross elasticity suggests that the two products being considered are unrelated or independent goods. An example is walnuts and plums: We would not expect a change in the price of walnuts to have any effect on purchases of plums, and vice versa.
Income Elasticity of Demand
Income elasticity of demand measures the degree to which consumers respond to a change in their incomes by buying more or less of a particular good. The coefficient of income elasticity of demand Ei is determined with the formula:
Ei = percentage change in quantity demanded percentage change in income.
Normal Goods For most goods, the income-elasticity coefficient Ei is positive, meaning that more of them are demanded as incomes rise. Such goods are called normal or superior goods (and were first described in Chapter 3). But the value of Ei varies greatly among normal goods. For example, income elasticity of demand for automobiles is about 13, while income elasticity for most farm products is only about 1.20.
Inferior Goods A negative income-elasticity coefficient designates an inferior good. Retread tires, cabbage, longdistance bus tickets, used clothing, and muscatel wine are likely candidates. Consumers decrease their purchases of inferior goods as incomes rise.

