The law of demand tells us that, other things equal, consumers will buy more of a product when its price declines and less when its price increases. But how much more or less will they buy? The amount varies from product to product and over different price ranges for the same product. It also may vary over time. And such variations matter. For example, a firm contemplating a price hike will want to know how consumers will respond. If they remain highly loyal and continue to buy, the firm?s revenue will rise. But if consumers defect en masse to other sellers or other products, the firm?s revenue will tumble. The responsiveness (or sensitivity) of consumers to a price change is measured by a product?s price elasticity of demand. For some products?for example, restaurant meals consumers are highly responsive to price changes. Modest price changes cause very large changes in the quantity purchased. Economists say that the demand for such products is relatively elastic or simply elastic. For other products? for example, toothpaste? consumers pay much less attention to price changes. Substantial price changes cause only small changes in the amount purchased. The demand for such products is relatively inelastic or simply inelastic. Economists measure the degree to which demand is price elastic or inelastic with the coefficient Ed, defined as the percentage changes in the equation are calculated by dividing the change in quantity demanded by the original quantity demanded and by dividing the change in price by the original price. So we can restate the formula as. Unfortunately, an annoying problem arises in computing the price-elasticity coefficient. A price change from, say, $4 to $5 along a demand curve is a 25 percent (= $1/$4) change from $5 to $4 along the same curve is a 20 percent (= $1/$5) decrease. Which percentage change in price should we use in the denominator to compute the price-elasticity coefficient? And when quantity changes, for example, from 10 to 20, it is a 100 percent (=10/10) increase. But when quantity falls from 20 to 10 along the identical demand curve, it is a 50 percent (=10/20) decrease. Should we use 100 percent or 50 percent in the numerator of the elasticity formula? Elasticity should be the same whether price rises or falls! The simplest solution to the problem is to use the midpoint formula for calculating elasticity. This formula simply averages the two prices and the two quantities as the reference points for computing the percentages. The percentage change in price is now $1/$4.50, or about 22 percent, and the percentage change in quantity is 10 15, or about 67 percent. So Ed is about 3. This solution eliminates the ?up versus down? problem. All the price-elasticity coefficients that follow are calculated using this midpoint formula. Why use percentages rather than absolute amounts in measuring consumer responsiveness? There are two reasons. First, if we use absolute changes, the choice of units will arbitrarily affect our impression of buyer responsiveness. To illustrate: If the price of a bag of popcorn at the local softball game is reduced from $3 to $2 and consumers increase their purchases from 60 to 100 bags, it will seem that consumers are quite sensitive to price changes and therefore that demand is elastic. After all, a price change of 1 unit has caused a change in the amount demanded of 40 units. But by changing the monetary unit from dollars to pennies (why not?), we find that a price change of 100 units (pennies) causes a quantity change of 40 units. This may falsely lead us to believe that demand is inelastic. We avoid this problem by using percentage changes. This particular price decline is the same whether we measure it in dollars or pennies. Second, by using percentages, we can correctly compare consumer responsiveness to changes in the prices of different products. It makes little sense to compare the effects on quantity demanded of (1) a $1 increase in the price of a $10,000 used car with (2) a $1 increase in the price of a $1 soft drink. Here the price of the used car has increased by .01 percent while the price of the soft drink is up by 100 percent. We can more sensibly compare the consumer responsiveness to price increases by using some common percentage increase in price for both. We know from the downsloping demand curve that price and quantity demanded are inversely related. Thus, the price-elasticity coefficient of demand Ed will always be a negative number. As an example, if price declines, then quantity demanded will increase. This means that the numerator in our formula will be positive and the denominator negative, yielding a negative Ed. For an increase in price, the numerator will be negative but the denominator positive, again yielding a negative Ed. Economists usually ignore the minus sign and simply present the absolute value of the elasticity coefficient to avoid an ambiguity that might otherwise arise. It can be confusing to say that an E of 24 is greater than one of 22. This possible confusion is avoided when we say an Ed of 4 reveals greater elasticity than one of 2. So, in what follows, we ignore the minus sign in the coefficient of price elasticity of demand and show only the absolute value. Incidentally, the ambiguity does not arise with supply because price and quantity supplied are positively related. All elasticity of supply coefficients therefore are positive numbers. 
